README.md, before:

# Procedural Content Creation Slides

This repository contains the slide for the PCC unit, you can get the raw markdown notes from here or view the full reveal.js slides by clicking the links below.

The webpage [https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/) contains the full slides and labs as well as other material. 

## Week 1

- [Lecture 1 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture1) 
- [Lecture 1 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab1)

## Week 2

- [Lecture 2 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture2)
- [Lecture 2 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab2)


## Week 3

- [Lecture 3 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture3)
- [Lecture 3 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab3)

## Week 4

- [Lecture 4 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture4)
- [Lecture 4 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab4)


## Week 5

- [Lecture 5 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture5)
- [Lecture 5 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab5)

## Week 6

- [Lecture 6 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture6)
- [Lecture 6 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab6)

## Week 7

- [Lecture 7 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture7)
- [Lecture 7 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab7)

## Week 8

- [Lecture 8 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture8)
- [Lecture 8 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab8)

## Week 9

- [Lecture 9 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture9)
- [Lecture 9 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab9)

## Week 10

- [Lecture 10 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture10)
- [Lecture 10 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab10)

## Week 11

- [Lecture 11 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture11)
- [Lecture 11 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab11)

## Week 12

- [Lecture 12 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture12)
- [Lecture 12 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab12)

Commit message:

Adjusting the logic in lecture 1

README.md, after:

# Procedural Content Creation Slides

This repository contains the slide for the PCC unit, you can get the raw markdown notes from here or view the full reveal.js slides by clicking the links below.

The webpage [https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/) contains the full slides and labs as well as other material. 

## Week 1

- [Introduction and your first script in Python](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture1) 
- [Files and Libraries](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture2)

## Week 2

- [Lecture 2 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture2)
- [Lecture 2 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab2)


## Week 3

- [Lecture 3 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture3)
- [Lecture 3 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab3)

## Week 4

- [Lecture 4 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture4)
- [Lecture 4 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab4)


## Week 5

- [Lecture 5 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture5)
- [Lecture 5 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab5)

## Week 6

- [Lecture 6 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture6)
- [Lecture 6 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab6)

## Week 7

- [Lecture 7 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture7)
- [Lecture 7 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab7)

## Week 8

- [Lecture 8 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture8)
- [Lecture 8 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab8)

## Week 9

- [Lecture 9 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture9)
- [Lecture 9 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab9)

## Week 10

- [Lecture 10 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture10)
- [Lecture 10 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab10)

## Week 11

- [Lecture 11 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture11)
- [Lecture 11 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab11)

## Week 12

- [Lecture 12 Slides](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lecture12)
- [Lecture 12 Lab](https://ncca.github.io/PCCSlides/Lab12)
